The following article will contain many heavy spoilers about Assassin’s Creed Origins’ story and characters (playable and otherwise) that weren’t revealed before the game’s release. As such, if you don’t want to be completely spoiled, turn back now and go enjoy the game. 

Bayek of Siwa is the main protagonist of Assassin’s Creed Origins. A medjay of Egypt, he is tasked with protecting his people, helping them overcome whatever trials and tribulations should arise during their lives. However, after failing to defend his son against the dark forces that work in his nation’s shadows, Bayek is set on a different path.

Rage, sadness, and vengeance consume Bayek so he seeks out those who led to the death of his son. His journey takes him far away from his home of Siwa, a small village built up around the temple of Amun, the very temple where he lost everything. Assassin’s Creed Origins opens up with the medjay seeking out one of his targets, a masked man who has brought pain and suffering to the people he was supposed to protect. After killing the man, bludgeoning his skull with an odd relic, Bayek makes his way towards home, done with his mission.

While killing a target sure feels good, Assassin’s Creed Origins doesn’t really open up about why things are happening until a bit later, when players seek out the Ibis, a powerful masked leader of Egypt who was given the title of Oracle of Siwa. With this position, the Ibis, whose real name was Medunamun, sought to uncover the secrets of the Temple of Amun, namely what lied in the vault beneath. He tortured villagers, made blood sacrifices, and pretty much turned a relatively peaceful existence into absolute hell.

During a flashback, it is revealed that Medunamun, along with some other masked individuals, kidnapped Bayek’s son Khemu in order to draw out Bayek and figure out how to open the vault. They carried a relic, one that fans of the series will recognize as the Apple of Eden, an item that could break the wills of those around it, but has a noticeable side effect of turning its wielder’s mad. During the flashback, the masked ones threaten Khemu’s life, and in an ensuing struggle, lead Bayek to drive a blade into the child’s heart before beating him and leaving him for dead. Back in the present, Bayek tracks down the vicious Oracle and bludgeons him to death with that very same relic he held in the past.

His friend Hepzefa, who helped him find Medunamun, holds a message from Aya, Bayek’s wife. She wants him to come to the great city of Alexandria in order to take out the Snake, he who they believe to be the last target on their list, and the final piece of justice for their lost son.
A lot happens in Alexandria, much of it which starts leading to the first signs of the assassins we’ve come to know and love. Upon reaching Alexandria and meeting with Aya’s friends and family, who are forced to keep things hush hush, Bayek is finally reunited with his bride. If you were expecting some meek woman, you’re in for a surprise. When you first meet Aya she’s decked out in her warrior garb and hiding in a secret library after having taken out the Vulture, Actaeon, and the Ram, Ktesos, in Alexandria. She’s not afraid to get her hands dirty, and in some ways is better at it than even Bayek. She has some information for her husband, and a new tool.

Aya serves as a close aide to queen Cleopatra who was dethroned by her brother Ptolemy. Cleopatra has Aya working in the shadows to help her regain her throne and, by extension, save Egypt from the strife it currently faces. To that end, she’s provided Aya with a gift, the famed hidden blade. Aya gives one to Bayek as he sets out for the royal scribe Eudoros who they believe to be the snake.

Bayek finds him in the bathhouse and kills him without anyone realizing he was even there (or recklessly if you prefer). During the struggle, Bayek loses his left ring finger, which begins the tradition of initiates giving up their finger. It’s extreme, but it was necessary as it allowed the blade to extend without restriction. Don’t worry though, eventually it was modified to no longer be necessary, with some assassins opting to brand their finger as part of the ceremony rather than hack it off.

After the assassination, it’s time for Bayek to finally meet Cleopatra, who has a request and some important news for our hero.

After taking out Eudoros, Cleopatra thanks Bayek and Aya for their service, but also informs them that there is more to do. You see, Eudoros wasn’t the Snake. In fact, no single person is the Snake. It is a many-headed beast known as the Order of the Ancients. This group is made up of various key individuals who each represent a different creature. Eudoros was the Hippo, and he wasn’t the one responsible for the death of Bayek’s son, at least not exclusively responsible. Cleopatra has caught wind of four more targets that are tormenting Egypt and stand in the way of her reclaiming her throne and pulling Egypt out of this dark period.

They are the Lizard, the Crocodile, the Hyena, and the Scarab, and they each hold influence over specific regions of Egypt. In order to obtain justice for their son and help the nation as a whole, Bayek and Aya agree to hunt these targets down. Before they set out, Cleopatra restores Bayek’s title of Medjay and hands him a new badge. He’s back to being a protector of Egypt and this time for the true Pharoah, Cleopatra.